Hello and welcome to the Center of Excellence training series on TAK. In this tutorial we will cover how to utilize data packages in ATAK. Let’s get started. Simply put data packages are a way to bundle items you might want to share with other TAK users. One caveat I must mention is that as of early 2024 there is not complete parity yet between ATAK and iTAK in this function.

First, open ATAK and navigate to the main map screen. I have a few data points already populated on my map. If you don’t know how to make these points check out our ATAK tutorial on the point dropper tool. 

We covered how to share points individually, but it is often more effective to send them as a group which ATAK calls a data package. Start by navigating to the main menu and scrolling down to data packages.  When you open the data packages page you will likely see COTAK or WFTAK listed. The COTAK/WFTAK server automatically gives you a package that includes set up information. You may ignore or delete this data package if desired.

To create a new data package, click the plus sign at the top of the page. There are several ways to select which items you would like to add to the package. The first option is map select. This option allows you to select individual data points by selecting them in the map pane. As you select these points they will become highlighted and added to your list. If you would like to remove a point from your selection \- either tap the point on the map again, or press the trashcan next to the data point’s name. Once you have selected all the points that you would like to send, hit done on the data package page. You can choose to create a new data package or add to an existing one. Since I currently don’t have any data packages I will create a new one. Next name the package. I will name mine \- points of interest office. Then hit build. You will see your new data package populate under the pre existing data packages. The same procedure can be used to send items drawn on the map with the drawing tool.

Adding content to a data package via the Overlays tool is useful for when you have a combination of several different types of data to share that aren’t easily selected via the map pane – Points, shapes and perhaps even aerial imagery.  

Using the file select option is often most useful for sending data that has been created via a different platform like Google Earth Pro or other GIS type software. This is common for shared trail data or boundaries. Geopdfs like Incident Action Plan maps may be shared in this manner.

Next you’ll have to decide whether you want to send the package to an individual contact or upload it to the server. Sending a data package to a contact means that ATAK will make one attempt to transmit your package to the other user. If you or that user have a poor internet connection or become disconnected from the TAK Server the package will fail to reach the other user. If you use this method it is best practice to confirm with your other user that they received the package successfully. 

The “Select Server” option uploads your package to the TAK Server, and can often be the most reliable manner to disperse your data. If you choose upload to server, then the responsibility to retrieve the package is on the recipient. This tends to be the most reliable manner as the recipient can choose when they are in a good place to have connectivity, either wifi or cellular data service. They will need to search the server using the down arrow inside the box, with the proper channels enabled to locate the package.

When you upload a data package to the server it will be tagged with every channel that you have turned on at the moment you upload the package, meaning that later on every user with access to that channel will be able to download it. As a result the best practice when you wish to upload a data package to the server is to first turn off every TAK channel except the one you wish to share the package with, then upload the package. After you have finished your upload you may turn other TAK channels back on.

Similarly users attempting to download a data package must have the TAK channel associated with the package turned on when they search the server. Only support staff can correct erroneously uploaded data packages. Data packages may be subject to data retention policies, meaning they may be removed from the TAK Server after a set period of time. Consult your TAK program’s website for definitive guidance on this topic.

This concludes our tutorial for the ATAK Data Packages tool, powered by the Colorado Department of Public Safety and the Center of Excellence for Advanced Technology Aerial Firefighting. Thanks for watching\!