Hello and welcome to the Center of Excellence training series on TAK. In this tutorial we will cover how to download and access offline maps in iTAK. Let's get started. 

iTAK’s preloaded Apple maps are not available for offline use. In order to download maps on iTAK you must first import a custom map source. To do this navigate to cotak.gov on your iPhone or iPad and log in. Select resources and downloads. Scroll down to iTAK and locate USGS Topo and USGS Imagery. You may download either or both of these maps to your device. 

 Once the maps have downloaded, open iTAK. Navigate to iTAK’s settings, and select map source. This is where you can select the pre configured and downloaded maps. To import your custom map source tap the plus button in the bottom right. Select “import saved map” then select the map you downloaded from cotak.gov. Your new map will then appear in the Custom Map Sources section. Select USGS and then tap the plus arrow once more. Select “Download Offline Maps” and you will be directed to the area selector. This page is where you can select the rectangular map area that you would like to be available offline. You may manually move the map, enter and address, or input the central coordinates of the area. As you reposition the area that you would like to download, iTAK will update the amount of storage needed to complete the download. Larger map areas will result in significantly larger files. Once you are happy with your selection enter a name for your offline map then select download. iTAK will then download the map and it will be ready for use in the offline maps section of the map source selector. Select the Offline Map as your map source and return to the iTAK main page. You will notice that iTAK is still populating the map outside your selected area. This is because iTAK will utilize your internet connection to continually the map area that you are searching for. However, when you become offline, you may find that areas outside of what you downloaded are no longer visible. With that being said, you may either leave the offline map as your permanent map source, or you may switch to it only when needed.

This concludes our iTAK tutorial on downloading and accessing offline maps, powered by the Colorado Department of Public Safety and the DFPC Center of Excellence for Advanced Technology Aerial Firefighting. Thanks for watching\!

